title: Proton manual
brief: Proton is a website preprocessor.
--

<pre>
$ gem install proton
$ proton
</pre>

h2. Why use Proton?

It's like building a static site, but better! You can use Proton for:

* Building HTML prototypes
* Building sites with no dynamic logic
* Creating a blog where the entries are stored in a source repository

h2. Getting started

<section class='literate'>
<pre>
$ proton create myproject
  create   myproject/
  create   myproject/index.md
  create   myproject/Protonfile
  ...

$ cd myproject
</pre>

h4. Create your first project

Create your first project using "@proton create@":proton_create.html. This will create a new folder for you.
</section>

<section class='literate'>
<pre>
$ proton start
* Starting server...
>> Thin web server (v1.2.11 codename Bat-Shit Crazy)
>> Maximum connections set to 1024
>> Listening on 0.0.0.0:4833, CTRL+C to stop
</pre>

h4. Open a live preview

Typing "@proton start@":proton_start.html, will get you a live preview in `http://localhost:4833`. Point your browser there to see your changes as you make them.
</section>

<section class='literate'>
<pre>
[myproject/index.haml (haml)]
%h1 Helol teher!
%p Welcome nt omy site.
</pre>

<pre>
[myproject/about_us.markdown (markdown)]
About us
========

This is text written in Markdown.
</pre>

h4. Edit your pages

Use your favorite text editor to edit your files. You can write in Markdown, Textile or "HAML":http://hamllang.com for HTML, or "Sass":http://sass-lang.com for CSS, and many more.
</section>

<section class='literate'>
<pre>
$ proton build
       * _output/index.html
       * _output/about_us.html
</pre>

h4. Build your HTML

By typing "@proton build@":proton_build.html, you get your site as simple HTML files.
</section>

h2. Features

*  __Layouts and Partials:__ Proton lets you define your site's header and footer layouts in a separate file, and even separate snippets of your site into reuseable components (partials). Your code will be much cleaner and DRYer!

*  __Template languages:__ Proton lets you write your site in any template language you need -- the translation will be taken care of for you. Proton supports HAML, LessCSS, Markdown, SASS and Textile by default, and more can be added through extensions.

*  __Extendable:__ Proton is easily customizable with extensions. You can add new helpers, new commands, support for new languages and many more by simply adding the extensions to your project folder.

*  __Design fast:__ Proton comes with a web server that lets you serve up your site locally. Any changes to your files will be seen on your next browser refresh!

*  __Build your site as static HTMLs:__ You can export your site as plain HTML files with one simple command.

<a class='github-link' href="http://github.com/sinefunc/proton">Source</a>
